This is the first video in a collection of several videos on mutual information covariance and mechanistic
interpretability.
It is in the section on Examining Layers, but mutual information and covariance are useful and general
analysis methods that work for lots of different situations and many different features of the model,
and not just layers per se.
So the purpose of this video is to introduce you to the formula and interpretation of mutual information,
and I'll show you how to implement it using several different approaches in Python.
So this video is not really about LX per se, but the methods that you will use in later videos.
Mutual information is based on a quantity called entropy.
So let me first introduce you to the math and interpretation of entropy.
And then we can switch to discussing mutual information.
Actually the word entropy is used in several different contexts and it has several different meanings.
You might be familiar with the concept of entropy in physics and thermodynamics, where that term entropy
refers to the fact that order tends to move towards disorder, and things that are neat and organized
eventually become chaotic and disorganized.
Unfortunately, this interpretation of entropy leads to some very difficult existential thoughts about
the universe.
But don't worry.
The way that we will use entropy here in data analysis is a different interpretation from Claude Shannon,
and it is much more upbeat and happy than the Then the thermodynamics interpretation in the context
of information theory.
Entropy is a quantification of the amount of variability or unexpectedness.
It's also usually called surprise in this literature.
In a data set.
So this graph over here shows entropy on the y axis and the probability of an event occurring on the
x axis.
Now when the probabilities are close to zero or close to one, then there isn't much unexpectedness
happening.
For example, if we think about the probability of the sun coming up in the morning, that's a very
high probability.
Therefore, you are not surprised when the sun comes up in the morning.
On the other hand, something that has a probability of 0.5 has a lot of entropy.
So here you can think about flipping a coin.
The coin has an equal chance of landing on heads or tails, and therefore the outcome is more variable.
Now, in the context of information theory that probability has a high entropy.
So you can also think of the entropy as being like the predictability of a system.
So if you can accurately predict a particular outcome then the entropy will be low.
But if you cannot predict an outcome then the entropy is higher.
Now these are all somewhat vague and imprecise statements.
And I'll show you the formula on the next slide.
But I do want to lighten the mood a little bit after the previous slide, and say that entropy in information
theory states that everything and everyone is great and happy, and we all like being surprised because
surprises convey more Information.
Okay, let's do some math.
Here is the formula for entropy in information theory.
It's often indicated using a capital H.
The formula itself is pretty straightforward.
You need to know the probability of certain events taking place or being observed.
And then you simply multiply the probability by the log of the probability.
And then you sum up over all of the possible data categories.
So that would be n data categories.
And then you have your entropy.
Now because probabilities are all between 0 and 1 the log of those probabilities will be negative.
And so the sum will necessarily be negative.
Therefore we add a negative sign out front just so that entropy ends up being positive.
And that just makes the interpretation a little bit easier.
You can also see that there is a potential problem with this formula when the probability is zero.
So the log of zero is not a finite number.
So we can have numerical problems with this calculation.
In practice there are a few ways to deal with this.
One way is to ignore from the analysis any probabilities that are exactly zero.
And another option is to add a very tiny number inside the log.
Now, that number would be so small that it doesn't really impact the analysis for non-zero probabilities.
And if the probability is zero, then the log of that tiny number will be some really large negative
number.
But then it gets multiplied by the probability out here, which is still zero.
Anyway, I'll show you some of these Approaches for numerical stability when I switch to code.
Now, one difficulty of using entropy is that this formula is really designed for categorical events,
like a coin landing on heads or tails, or a token index, or a grammatical category like noun or verb
or adjective.
But we are going to use entropy and mutual information on activation values, which are continuous numbers.
So that causes some headaches.
And the solution is to use histograms to approximate probabilities.
And unfortunately that also can lead to some headaches because it means that we need to choose the number
of bins and the method of binning the data.
And these parameter choices can impact the entropy estimation.
I'll talk about this in more detail in code.
Although to be honest, a really detailed discussion of this is more for a course on statistics or machine
learning.
So I'm not going to get into a ton of detail about it here.
Anyway, the upshot of all this math is that when the data set has a lot of variability, then entropy
is higher.
And the flip side of that interpretation is that when entropy is low, it means that the data has a
lot of redundancies.
That means the data are highly predictable.
In other words, entropy is a measure of the variability of the data.
But you're already familiar with another quantification of variability, which is the standard deviation
or variance.
So how does entropy relate to variance.
Well, the short version of the story is that variance is a linear measure of variability, whereas
entropy is a nonlinear measure.
So entropy also doesn't really make assumptions about the distribution of the data, whereas variance
is based on interpreting the mean.
And so variance and also standard deviation are mainly interpretable or mainly suitable for data that
are at least somewhat normally distributed, and that is not the case for entropy with entropy.
You can have any data distribution that happens to be observed.
In the next video, I'm going to talk more about the relationship between mutual information and covariance.
So I'll also get back to this discussion in later videos.
So let's now talk about mutual information.
If you think of this Venn diagram as the entropy in variable x and this is the entropy in variable y.
Then where they overlap over here.
That is the mutual information.
I will show two formulas for calculating mutual information on the following slide.
But essentially the idea is that mutual information is designed to quantify how much you can know about
one variable if you measure another variable.
And we can think about two extremes.
Let's say you measure the amount of hydrogen in different stars in the Milky Way galaxy.
And you also measured the price of Bitcoin in the past ten years.
Those two variables have literally nothing whatsoever to do with each other.
And so the mutual information between them would be zero.
On the other hand, let's say you measure the price of Bitcoin and the price of Ethereum over the past
ten years.
Now, those two variables are closely related to each other.
They're not identical, but it certainly is the case that knowing the price of Ethereum gives you some
indication of the price of Bitcoin.
So the mutual information between those two variables would be significantly larger than zero.
And what exactly could you say about the price of Bitcoin if you knew the price of Ethereum using mutual
information?
Well here mutual information is not so super duper helpful.
If you want to make an actual prediction about the value of one variable given the value of another
variable.
Then mutual information is just not the proper analysis.
So mutual information tells you about the overlap of predictability of one variable and another, but
it does not tell you the exact values of one variable, given what you know about another variable.
Mutual information is often indicated using the capital letter I.
So here you see two different but equivalent formulas for mutual information.
Now mutual information is always calculated between two variables.
It's a bivariate measure of statistical dependency.
So x and y would be two different variables.
Let's say for example two different neurons in an MLP transformer Subblock.
Now this first formula here looks an awful lot like entropy, except that the joint probability of x
and Y is normalized by the individual probabilities.
This second formula here is more similar to the Venn diagram that I showed in the previous slide, which
you also see here.
So in other words, you add up the entropies of each of the two variables individually, and then you
subtract off what you can learn about the two of them together.
Now, it might initially seem strange that we are adding the individual entropies and then subtracting
off the joint entropy, but remember that entropy is defined using a minus sign.
So you can actually think about inverting these signs to say that it's the joint entropy minus the entropies
of the two individual variables.
By the way, you might have noticed that the formula I used for entropy had a log two base in a previous
slide, whereas here I'm using the natural log.
Now in practice you would consistently use one or the other.
So either log base two or the natural log, but the base of the logarithm doesn't actually matter in
most applications of mutual information.
It does change the units of the results, for example bits versus nats.
In this case, but that doesn't change the relative mutual information between different variables or
different conditions.
I would also like to point out that all of these formulas for entropy and mutual information are not
based on the data themselves.
They're based on the probabilities of the data values or the data bins.
And that means that the scale of the data has no impact on mutual information.
So for example, if you would multiply the data values by a billion, that literally has no impact on
the mutual information value.
And I mentioned that as a bit of a segue to comparing mutual information to covariance, which you will
learn about in the next video.
And it will also be relevant a couple of videos thereafter.
Anyway, as I mentioned a few slides ago, this formula is pretty straightforward when you have discrete
categories.
But we are working with continuous activation numbers.
So floating point numbers.
And so all of these calculations have to be based on estimating probabilities using histograms and joint
histograms.
And that leads me to the Python demo.
The purpose of the Python demo is to show you the basics of implementing entropy and mutual information.
I will introduce some additional nuances to mutual information over the next several videos.
So to start with I'm going to generate some bivariate data that has a statistical dependency built in.
And that's what you see here.
Now it's just two arbitrary variables, and it's clear that they are correlated.
So they share some information.
And the picture you see over here is the discretized joint histogram of these two variables.
Entropy and mutual information is not actually calculated from the original full resolution data.
Instead it's calculated from this map of counts.
Now that is tricky because the number of bins that you use to generate this lower resolution histogram
is a parameter of the analysis, and you will get different results if you use, for example, 15 versus
25 versus 50 bins in the variables.
You can also see that there are a lot of bins with no data points in them.
Now that can create fatal numerical errors in the formula with the logarithm.
So we need to address that problem.
Now from this 2D histogram we can calculate the bivariate entropy.
But to calculate mutual information we also need the entropies of each variable separately.
Now it turns out that once we have this 2D histogram, the entropies of the individual variables can
be calculated simply by taking the marginal average.
So basically the projection of this blob onto the x axis and onto the y axis.
And that's what you see here.
These are the entropies the distributions from which entropy is calculated.
Of the two individual variables.
And then we can use all of those numbers to calculate mutual information.
After showing you this demo of how to calculate mutual information by directly translating the formulas
into code, I will do another demo where I simulate data that have no relationship whatsoever to each
other.
So two completely independent variables.
Now we know from theory that the expected mutual information should be zero.
And of course with some sampling variability and small sample sizes, the mutual information might be
a little bit above zero, but it should be pretty close to zero.
However, we are going to get values of around 0.5, maybe even higher.
That is much bigger than what we can expect from sampling variability, and it reflects some systematic
biases that are introduced by the discretization and histogram binning.
So therefore I will then show you another method of calculating entropy, which actually only makes
it worse, although it's still kind of interesting to see this alternative approach.
And then finally I will use a method for calculating mutual information from the scikit learn library.
This uses a different and more accurate way of estimating the probability distributions, and that gives
us a mutual information value for uncorrelated variables very close to zero.
This little bit above zero is to be expected giving given, you know, noise and sampling variability
and so on.
Anyway, I will have more to say about this scikit learn function over the next several videos.
It is good to use.
It can be more accurate than just implementing the formula directly, but it's also quite slow.
and the direct implementation here actually still is quite accurate, just with a constant bias that
is introduced.
So you don't actually always need or maybe even want to use the scikit learn implementation.
Anyway, I will now switch to code and show you how mutual information is calculated.
And of course I encourage you to follow along in the code.
Mostly I will just calculate entropy and mutual information directly based on the formulas using numpy.
But then towards the end, as I mentioned, I will use some scikit learn tools.
In particular, this function mutual information regression which is in the sklearn featureselection
library.
So let's import those here I'm collecting or creating the data.
So I'm going to generate 200 data points.
Random numbers for x y is also random numbers.
However, then I'm adding x onto it.
This is just a very simple way of introducing a statistical dependency between two variables.
So y equals x plus some innovations if you will, or a bit of noise.
Okay here I'm taking the histogram of these two data these two variables using 15 bins.
And then the plotting code I encourage you to look over but it's fairly straightforward.
So just creating a scatter plot here.
Here is an image of the 2D histogram data.
So this just reproduces a figure that I showed in the slides a moment ago.
And basically each one of these blocks is color coded according to the count, which you can interpret
as probability.
In fact, if you would normalize this then you would get exactly the probability values.
And again you also see that lots of values around here around the edges have a count of zero, which
means they will also have a probability of zero, which means we're going to be taking the log of zero,
which is illegal in math.
And so we will need to address that problem somehow.
Okay.
So here what I'm doing is scaling by the sum.
This converts this matrix here of counts into probabilities.
So the sum over all of the p underscore z matrix values will be one.
And then we get the marginal probability distributions.
So the probability over x and over y simply by calculating the marginal sum.
So again we're summing over.
So all the columns are summing over all the rows.
And that gives us the projection onto the two axes which is the marginal probability distributions for
each of the variables.
Here I'm calculating mutual information.
Sorry.
Entropy.
Here I'm calculating entropy.
So remember there's a minus sign and then a summation.
Inside the summation we multiply the probability values by the log of the probability values.
And then because some of these values will be zero I'm adding on epsilon just some very very small number.
And as I mentioned in the slides the idea is that when these probabilities are non-zero then adding
this tiny number does basically nothing.
But when this value is exactly zero, then this log is going to be, I don't know, like minus, you
know, -150 or something really large and negative.
But at least it won't crash.
It's not we're not going to get an error because we're taking the log of zero.
And it doesn't matter what this number is because it multiplies this probability here, which is not
summed with the EPs.
So this actually can be zero.
Okay.
So that's the entropy for these two variables.
It's 3.5 whatever that means.
I can show you very quickly that when we change the number of bins.
So let's make this be 25.
And now we can calculate this again.
So now just keep this in mind.
These two entropy values are around 3.5 for each of the variables.
And now they're around for a little bit above four.
And well I guess I did regenerate the data.
So maybe a better demo would be to comment this out.
So I'm not getting new data, but that's okay.
Actually yeah I will do that now.
Okay.
So comment this out.
So now the data are exactly the same.
But now I'm going back to 15 bins okay.
And now the entropy is for a little bit above for that was with 25 bins and now with 15 bins, it goes
back to being 3.33.4 or so.
This is one of the tricky aspects of calculating entropy and mutual information from continuous variables,
which include the activation values that we'll be using over the next several videos.
But that's a level of nuance that I won't get into here.
Okay, so here I'm getting the entropy over Z.
So this is the joint entropy.
You can see the formula is exactly the same as entropy for x and y.
And here is just the literal implementation of the formula that I showed in the slides.
So the entropy of x plus the entropy of y minus the entropy of Z or the joint entropy.
And now we get a value that is close to one.
So 0.96.
So now what I want to do is go back and uh, let's see.
Uncomment that.
So we're generating new data.
But I'm going to write x times zero.
So that means that's the same thing as just deleting this actually okay.
So now x and y are completely uncorrelated.
You can see that here as well.
You don't see any obvious linear or non-linear relationships between these variables.
It's just a big isotropic cloud of dust okay.
So now what is the uh the entropy is about the same.
That's fine.
What is the mutual information between these.
Well we expect it to be exactly zero.
That's the theoretical expectation.
In practice when we are sampling data it's never going to be exactly zero.
But we do expect it to be pretty close to zero.
However here we get a value of 0.43, which is still a pretty respectably high amount of mutual information.
Okay, so now what I'm going to do is come up with a different way of binning the data.
So instead of binning the data to create equal sized bins where there may or may not be data values
in each bin, here I'm using the percentile function to create equal sized partitions of the data.
So now I'm not partitioning the range of the data into 15 equal chunks.
Instead, I'm partitioning the actual data values such that there are 15 equal sized bins of data values.
So all the data values are in the same number of bins.
Okay.
And then I basically repeat this calculation here it gets even higher.
So this is unfortunately not a great solution.
But here I'm using the scikit learn function.
Mutual information regression.
And now it's a little bit trickier to implement because you cannot just implement your two variables
like this.
Instead I this function expects one of the matrices to be or one of the inputs to be a matrix a two
dimensional NumPy array.
Now we don't have two dimensional matrices.
These are matrices of numbers.
These are just two vectors.
So the easiest solution is just to reshape this.
And actually let me show you what this does.
So I can say x dot shape.
And that is 200 by nothing.
So this is a dimensionless array.
And now when I reshape this it becomes a 200 by one matrix which is like a yeah it's like a column vector.
Okay.
So that suddenly works, and now we get a value that is much closer to zero.
And as I mentioned in the slides, this is a numerical value for mutual information.
Given a finite sample data set that you can expect to be zero.
So this is just a little bit of sampling error.
And what is the difference between the code that I wrote above and this function here.
Basically this function is a bit more sophisticated.
It uses non-parametric kernel density estimators to estimate a probability distribution that is more
accurate than simply counting the number of observations in different bins.
So it is more accurate.
You will see in the next video or two videos for now.
Over the next several videos, you will see that this method is first of all really slow, so it can
be intractably Unusably slow if you have a lot of data to process.
And you will also see that the difference here between 0.4 and something very close to zero.
That's just a constant offset.
So all of the relative mutual information values are preserved.
And we just have this constant offset due to this estimation difficulty with with bins with values of
zero in them.
So that's the intro to Mutual information.
It's a good measure to know about.
It's used relatively often in science for measuring non-linear statistical dependencies between variables.
In the next video, I will show you how to implement mutual information in an LLM during token processing,
and then I will discuss the relationship between mutual information and covariance.